---
layout: layout
title: Coverage
---

# Coverage

This module uses [nyc](http://npm.im/nyc) to track code coverage, even
across subprocess boundaries.  It is included by default, and there's
nothing you need to do but enable it.  Adding coverage *will* make
your tests run slightly slower, but that's to be expected.

Nyc in turn uses [istanbul](http://npm.im/istanbul) to do the actual
coverage code transformation and reporting.

To generate coverage information, run your tests with the `--cov`
argument.

If you use this a lot, you may want to add `coverage` and
`.nyc_output` to your `.gitignore` and/or `.npmignore` files.

## Maximal Coverage ðŸ’¯

As of version 7, node-tap lets you easily enforce 100% coverage of all
lines, branches, functions, and statements with one easy flag, if
that's your thing:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "test": "tap test/*.js --100"
  }
}
```

If you do this in an open source module, please [join the exclusive
100 club](/100/).

## Travis-CI and Coveralls.io Integration

You can very easily take advantage of continuous test coverage reports
by using [Travis-CI](https://travis-ci.org) and
[Coveralls](https://coveralls.io).

1. Enable Travis-CI by signing up, enabling tests on your repo, and
   adding a `.travis.yml` file to your repo.  You can use [this
   module's .travis.yml file as an
   example](https://github.com/tapjs/node-tap/blob/master/.travis.yml)
2. Enable Coveralls.io by signing up, and adding the
   repo.  Note the repo API token.
3. Back at Travis-CI, add a private environment variable.  The name of
   the environment variable is `COVERALLS_REPO_TOKEN`, and the value
   is the token you got from Coveralls.
4. When that token is set in the environment variable, `tap` will
   automatically generate coverage information and send it to the
   appropriate place.

## Uploading Coverage to Other Services

There's no requirement that you use Coveralls!  Any coverage service
that understands `lcov` can be used as well.

For example, using [CodeCov](https://codecov.io), you can do the
following:

1. Add `codecov` as a devDependency in your project with this command:

        npm install codecov --save-dev

2. Add a `test` script that generates coverage information, and a
   `posttest` that uploads it to codecov:

        {
          "scripts": {
            "test": "tap test/*.js --coverage",
            "posttest": "tap --coverage-report=lcov && codecov"
          }
        }

## Local Coverage Reporting

Printing out a coverage report can be done along with tests, or after
any covered test run, using the `--coverage-report=<type>` argument.

The most popular types are `text` and `html`, but any report style
supported by istanbul is available, including:

- clover
- cobertura
- html
- json
- json-summary
- teamcity
- text
- text-lcov
- text-summary

To specify a report format, you can use `--coverage-report=<type>`.
The default type is `text`, which produces a pretty text-only table on
the terminal.  If you specify `--coverage-report=html`, then tap will
attempt to open a web browser to view the report after the test run.
